GATES: I'm Henry
Louis Gates, Jr.
Welcome to
"Finding Your Roots."
In this episode,
we'll meet television and
film producer Lee Daniels
and actor/director Rebecca Hall.
Two people whose lives
have been marked by
deep family mysteries.
HALL: I look at my mother...
She didn't look like
everyone else's mother
in the English countryside.
DANIELS: There were
certain things we just
didn't talk about.
GATES: Right.
DANIELS: And it's just
passed down from
generation to generation.
GATES: These silences.
DANIELS: Mmm-hmm.
GATES: Yeah.
DANIELS: Well the
silence stops with me.
GATES: To uncover their roots,
we've used every tool available.
Genealogists comb
through the paper trail
their ancestors left behind,
while DNA experts utilized
the latest advances in
genetic analysis to reveal
secrets hundreds of years old.
And we've compiled
everything into a book of life,
a record of all of
our discoveries.
HALL: How do you find these?
DANIELS: No. No!
GATES: And a window
into the hidden past.
HALL: Didn't see this coming.
Wow.
DANIELS: Not only is
it a history lesson
but it's personal.
It is, uh, powerful.
Our people have
gone through so much.
GATES: Lee and Rebecca grew up
in families where secrets and
social conventions
obscured their ancestry
behind thick veils.
In this episode, we're
going to lift those veils and
reconstruct their roots,
revealing new aspects
of their identities,
while shedding light on our
nation's complex racial past.
(theme music plays)
♪
(overlapping chatter)
GATES: Lee Daniels
is a true pioneer.
The multi-talented
producer, screenwriter,
and director has won
international fame in a career
that's spanned more
than three decades.
Along the way, he's
continually pushed boundaries,
daring Hollywood to
be more inclusive,
and leading the way via a
string of groundbreaking hits.
From the hard-edged
social drama "Precious",
to "Empire" the hip hop saga
of ambition, talent and greed.
But to hear Lee tell it, all
he's really done is hold up
a mirror to the people he
knows best: his family.
DANIELS: I am them.
My family is everything
that you see on screen.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
DANIELS: I carry them proudly.
The trauma, the pain,
the humor, the sexy.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
DANIELS: The everything
is celebrating them.
GATES: As Lee readily
acknowledges trauma is at the
heart of his work, the family
he so celebrates has not
always treated him so well.
Indeed his life has been
a constant process of
adjustment and adaptation.
Lee grew up in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
in a home where his
father, William Daniels,
a police officer, frequently
beat both Lee and his mother.
The abuse only ended
when William was killed
trying to stop a robbery.
Lee was just 15 at the time,
but he's still wrestling
with troubled
memories of his father.
DANIELS: I went through a
period of just in awe of this
man that was very literate who
wanted to be a lawyer but had
to settle for being a cop
because he had children.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
DANIELS: The books and the
literature that he had and the
poems that he wrote.
Uh, and his physical beauty,
all of it was just something
that sticks out in my
head when I think of my dad.
But he was abusive.
Uh, and I'm trying to
understand, at 61, why?
Why?
Because I do believe that he was
still somebody else's child.
GATES: Lee's questions may be
unanswerable but he knows
full well why he's been
able to carry on even as
those questions haunt him.
In the wake of
his father's death,
Lee's mother struggled to
raise him and ultimately made
a decision that would
essentially reinvent them both.
She told Lee that they were
going to use the address of a
wealthy acquaintance and
pretend that they lived in the
suburbs, so that Lee
could attend a better school.
DANIELS: It really
changed the trajectory of
who it is that I am.
GATES: Right.
DANIELS: Because I learned
how to navigate between an
all-Black world and
an all-white world.
So, I was able to seamlessly
go back and forth into, into
blossoming into who I am.
GATES: Did they
treat you well?
DANIELS: Yeah, mmm-hmm.
The only time I was not
treated well was when
I auditioned for
"the sound of music" and
I couldn't understand
why I couldn't play...
GATES: Von Trapp...
DANIELS: The lead.
GATES: Right.
DANIELS: I was like
what is the problem?
Because clearly that guy over
there ain't as good as I am.
I know that for sure.
I didn't understand.
I think it was the first
time I really understood race.
That I could not...
The teacher was
looking at me like,
how do we tell this
little Black boy?
You know.
GATES: My second guest is
renowned actor Rebecca Hall,
who's given life to a slew
of memorable characters in
a dizzying array of genres,
from classical theater to
Hollywood blockbusters.
Rebecca was born to be on stage.
Her father was Sir Peter Hall,
the legendary founder of
the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Her mother, Maria Louise Ewing,
was an international opera
star of the 1970s and 80s,
and Rebecca grew up in London,
the theater capital
of the world,
knowing that she
wanted to follow in
her parents footsteps.
Did they try to dampen any
theatrical inclination
that you had?
HALL: No, they were
very accepting of it.
They were very tolerant, but
I didn't really tell them
too much about it.
It was quite quiet
about it for a long time.
I was like, yes.
I knew I was going to
act forever and then
I didn't talk about it.
GATES: Yeah.
But I could hear them now:
"she thinks we don't know."
HALL: Yes. I think
that's definitely true.
GATES: Rebecca's parents may
have been clear-eyed about
her ambitions, but when
it came to helping her
understand her ancestry, well,
that was another story.
Her mother was an American,
born in Detroit, Michigan,
but she left the states
behind to pursue her career,
and Rebecca never
met her mother's father,
her own grandfather,
instead, she only
heard rumors about him.
Rumors that raised questions
about his ethnicity.
Those questions suddenly came
into focus when Rebecca read
"Passing", a classic
American novel about an
African American woman who
pretends that she's white.
How did you discover the novel?
HALL: I was talking
a lot to people
about the fact that
my mother intimated to
me that there was
African American ancestry
and that her father was
possibly Black,
possibly Native American.
She wasn't entirely sure.
And someone gave me
the book and said a lot of
the things that
you're talking about,
a lot of the things, you know,
there was a term for
what you're describing.
In your family and it
was called passing.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
HALL: I went, huh?
And they said read this book,
and I read it and even though
I don't know the facts of this
in my family and maybe you do
but I had a sort of
gut response to
the material that felt
very powerful to me.
GATES: Rebecca was so
taken by the novel that she
adapted it into a film,
all the while grappling
with how this material
related to her own identity.
GATES: Did you get grief
for being white or English?
HALL: Yes.
GATES: I mean I can't
believe that you didn't.
HALL: Yeah.
I mean when I was
pitching it to people and
trying to get it made.
Everyone would kind of
go, and then I'd say,
well, look, when I
was growing up my mother would
say things to me like,
well, you know we're Black.
And then another day she'd
say I don't really know,
and I'd say tell me more.
What's the details of it?
She said, well, I
don't really know.
And the more I started to
think about it the more I
started to understand that
while I have no experience of
what it is to be a Black
person in America in my
day-to-day walking
through the world,
what I do have experience of
is being raised by people who
were being raised
by people who did.
And so, I suppose people
felt that my interest in it
came honestly.
GATES: My two guests come from
very different backgrounds.
But as we began to
research their roots
we found that their
family stories overlapped
in very surprising ways
revealing secrets that had
lain hidden for generations.
It was time to bring
those secrets to light.
We started with Rebecca, and
the questions that had swirled
around her mother
since her childhood.
HALL: I look at my mother...
She was always very
extraordinarily beautiful,
yes, but just she didn't
look like everyone else's
mother in
the English countryside so,
I think on some level
I was always kind of,
fascinated in her, like,
what what's going on here?
GATES: So, how does
your mother self-identify?
When she checks the
census she does she check,
she would check white?
HALL: Yeah.
GATES: Right.
As we set out to untangle
her mother's identity,
we focused on the man at
the center of all the confusion.
Rebecca's maternal grandfather,
Norman Ewing.
Norman, by all accounts,
was larger than life:
a talented musician who gave
lectures and performances
centered around his
Native American heritage.
But Norman died in 1968,
taking the details
of that heritage with him
to the grave.
Rebecca knew absolutely
nothing about his parents,
much less his deeper roots.
We uncovered a newspaper
article from the year 1926
describing Norman's ties
to the Dakota-Sioux nation,
ties that were far deeper
than Rebecca had imagined.
HALL: "The Ithaca conservatory
of music is about to graduate
its first American Indian.
A hereditary chief
of the Sioux tribe,
a descendant of warriors
who fought on the
Custer battlefield,
he is Norman I. Ewing,
born on the Fort Peck
Indian reservation at
Poplar, Montana 30 years ago.
He grew up amidst the tribal
customs and ceremonials
of the Sioux.
At 13, he was left alone by
the death of both parents and
has since made his own way."
Huh.
GATES: Rebecca,
according to this article,
your grandfather Norman
was a chief of the Dakota,
one of the native
American tribes.
Not only that, it
appears that his and if true,
your ancestors fought in the
battle of Little Big Horn,
also known as of
course Custer's last stand.
Had you ever heard about this
experience for your grandfather?
HALL: No, no.
GATES: What do
you think of that?
HALL: It's very surprising.
GATES: We now set out to
verify Norman's story.
According to this article,
he was born in Poplar, Montana,
on what was known as the
Fort Peck Indian reservation.
We found him there in 1916,
marrying a Native American
woman named Maggie Culbertson.
Maggie died in the 1920s,
and Norman began to travel the
country soon after,
playing music and lecturing,
until the late 1930s, when he
married Rebecca's grandmother
and settled in Detroit.
So far, the story checked out.
But in the 1934 census for
the Fort Peck reservation,
we saw something curious
next to Norman's name:
the letters "N.E.",
an abbreviation for
"not enrolled"
which indicates that
Norman was not technically
a member of the
Dakota Sioux nation.
HALL: Wow.
GATES: We talked to a scholar
about this who said that it
was most likely because your
grandfather could not
produce documentation or
witnesses to substantiate
his claim to be a native person.
Now, why would a tribal chief
have trouble proving
that he was, in fact,
an indigenous person?
HALL: Because he wasn't?
GATES: Could you
please turn the page?
HALL: Yes.
GATES: Rebecca, this is
your grandfather's 1939
application for Social Security.
Would you please
read what it says?
HALL: "Norman Isaac Ewing,
color or race, White.
Date of birth, May 7, 1894.
Place of birth,
Falls Church, VA."
Virginia?
GATES: This application shows
that Rebecca's grandfather was
a white man born in Virginia,
not a Native American
from Montana.
It seemed like we solved our
mystery but we were wrong.
Digging deeper, we
found census records,
draft cards and other
documents that show Norman was
willfully and
quite creatively inconsistent
regarding his identity.
Sometimes he listed
himself as white,
sometimes as Native American,
and his birthplace
varied as well.
Desperate to find clarity,
we turned to Rebecca's DNA.
We gave her an admixture test,
which reveals a person's
ancestral heritage over
roughly the last 500 years.
If her grandfather, in fact,
had Native American DNA,
then Rebecca should
have inherited some of it.
The moment of tRuth was at hand.
You ready?
HALL: Yes.
GATES: Please turn the page.
Rebecca Hall, would you
please tell us how much
Native American genetic ancestry
that you have in your genome?
HALL: Um, none.
GATES: None. Zero.
HALL: Zero.
Yes, there's a large
one pie with no pieces.
GATES: So, it would appear,
at least according to your DNA,
that your grandfather fabricated
the story of his origin.
What's it like to see that?
HALL: I sort of understand
taking on that identity
because you married an
indigenous woman and
that was your community.
I don't entirely understand
how you could then become
an expert and live it
so publicly like that.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
HALL: Wow.
GATES: There was, of course, a
question still in front of us:
was Norman an African American?
Rebecca had heard
stories that he was,
and if those stories were true,
they would explain,
at least in part,
his decision to
hide his identity.
We found our answer in the 1910
census for Washington, DC,
where Norman and his
parents and siblings are
listed as "mulattoes",
meaning that they were
at least in part Black.
HALL: It's just moving
to see it written down.
GATES: Oh yeah.
HALL: Because the
weight of that.
GATES: Yes.
HALL: I think, you know,
it's confirmed,
I see something here.
I mean, it's not confirm...
Sort of confirmed
what I've always suspected and
yeah I just couldn't shake
the feeling that there was
something being
hidden in my growing up.
And honestly, it's a
tremendous relief to just
get it out.
GATES: Norman was 15 years old
when this census was recorded.
At that time, American racial
relations were defined by
Jim Crow segregation.
Legally African Americans
were second class citizens,
subjected to daily humiliations,
and vulnerable to the
constant threat of violence.
We believe that Norman
started listing himself as
Native American around
the time he married
his first wife in 1916.
That decision now
seemed understandable.
Embracing the myth of having
noble Native American ancestry
was a way for Norman to
break free of the anti-Black
racism that surrounded him.
Does knowing this make you
think of your grandfather,
and your identity differently?
HALL: I mean I knew
this on some level,
and I'm still grappling with
what that means for who I am.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
HALL: But I do think of
my success in the world,
my existence in the world,
on some level being
dependent on this choice.
GATES: Hmm.
HALL: And that's complicated.
GATES: That's
very complicated.
It enabled a set of
possibilities that resulted in
choices your mom could make,
which would have been closed
to her otherwise,
without a doubt.
HALL: Without a doubt.
GATES: Yeah.
Much like Rebecca, Lee Daniels
was about to uncover a once
scandalous story now
buried within his family tree.
It begins with his paternal
grandfather-Otis Daniels,
who helped to raise Lee
him and bring a measure of
happiness to a very
troubled childhood.
DANIELS: He was a
passive, wonderful man.
I think he had
eight or nine kids.
He did many jobs.
He was a manager of a gas
station to a manager of a
cinema house, movie theater.
Um, just salt of the earth,
great lemonade maker.
Um, beautiful man
that I miss very much.
GATES: Clearly Lee
loved his grandfather,
but he knew almost
nothing about Otis's roots.
And as we started our research,
we began to understand why.
In the 1930 census for
Durham, North Carolina,
we found Otis and his
mother Ada living in
a very unusual household.
DANIELS: "Laura Hunter,
head of household. Age, 35.
Widow.
Occupation, maid at hotel.
Ada Daniels, mother.
Age 49. Widow.
Occupation, worker at factory.
Otis Daniels, brother.
Age, 17."
What is that?
GATES: That's Otis
at the age of 17.
DANIELS: This is my grandfather?
GATES: Mm-hmm.
With his mother, your
great-grandmother, Ada Daniels,
living in the household
of Otis's older sister.
DANIELS: Otis's older sister.
GATES: Yep, and her
name was Laura Hunter.
Okay. You with me?
DANIELS: Yep.
GATES: Does anything on that
census strike you as odd?
DANIELS: Why isn't she
living with her husband?
GATES: Lee's question gets to
the heart of mystery:
where was Ada's husband,
Otis' father?
We could find no
records to guide us.
Otis' marriage license,
filed in 1940,
lists his father as a
man named "William Daniels",
and indicates that
William was deceased.
But our search for
William went nowhere.
GATES: Have you ever heard
this name or heard anything
about William Daniels?
DANIELS: Uh-uh.
GATES: Okay.
Well, Lee, we spent hours
researching this and we found
no evidence whatsoever of a
man named William Daniels that
he ever existed.
DANIELS: That's interesting.
GATES: So, we turned to DNA.
DANIELS: Okay.
GATES: And when we
analyzed your DNA we found
that you have a number of
matches who connect to you
through one man.
And that man is Otis's father.
That man, we discovered
just using DNA analysis.
He is your great-grandfather.
You want to meet him?
DANIELS: Yeah.
GATES: Please turn the page.
DANIELS: No! No!
GATES: Lee shares DNA with a
network of people all tied to
a man named Rufus Hunter.
This was shocking because
Rufus was the husband of
Otis's older
sister Laura Hunter,
and the father of
Otis' niece, Ruth.
So Rufus had children
with both Ada Daniels
and with her daughter Laura,
and they all lived
in the same house!
DANIELS: This is a gag.
This is outrageous.
GATES: It is
stunningly surprising.
DANIELS: Mmm-hmm.
GATES: Now, you
grew up knowing Ruth.
You called her Aunt Ruth.
DANIELS: I did.
GATES: Did she ever share
anything about her father's
relationship with either
her mother Laura or
your great-grandmother Ada?
DANIELS: No. None of it.
GATES: Do you think that
your grandfather knew
the identity of his father?
After all, he grew up
in Rufus's household.
DANIELS: There were certain
things we just didn't talk
about with our
grandparents and my father,
I could plug my mother for a
little bit but I could never,
there were certain things
you just didn't,
if they didn't
want to talk about it...
GATES: Right.
DANIELS: It wasn't talked about.
GATES: Has anything
that we've discussed changed
anything about the
way you think of your father,
about who he was or how
he became who he was?
DANIELS: It explains why
he would never give me
information about
my grandfather.
Though my grandfather
was really loving,
why my grandfather would
never give me information
about his father.
GATES: Right.
DANIELS: You know?
GATES: Yeah.
DANIELS: It's just passed down
from generation to generation
from one Black man
to the next Black man
to the next Black man.
GATES: These silences.
DANIELS: Mm-hmm.
GATES: Yeah.
DANIELS: Well, the
silence stops with me,
which is a good thing.
GATES: Now that we'd
identified Otis parents,
we could go further on this
branch of Lee's family tree.
Otis' grandfather, Lee's
great-great-grandfather,
was a man named "Novel Daniel".
Novel was born into
slavery sometime around 1800,
likely in Wake County,
North Carolina.
Searching for
evidence of his life,
we noticed that in 1850, a
white resident of Wake County
named "Zadock Daniel" filed a
slave schedule indicating that
he owned ten human beings,
we wondered if Novel
might be one of them.
So, he would have been between
about 45 and 55 years old in
that year 1850.
So, read those slaves again.
DANIELS: 45, 40, and 39.
GATES: Lee, we believe that
it's very likely that one of
these male slaves is your
great-great-grandfather and
that he was owned
by Zadock Daniel.
DANIELS: Fascinating.
GATES: And think
about this, if your
great-great-grandfather Novel
was indeed Zadock's slave it
would mean that you carry the
last name of the white man who
held your ancestor in bondage.
Have you given much thought to
the origins of your last name?
DANIELS: No, I was
looking forward to this.
I've been looking forward
to this for quite some time
and this is blowing my mind.
GATES: This record lists
Zadock Daniel's
enslaved human beings by age,
sex and color,
but not by name.
So, on its own, we can't
be certain that one of these
marks actually
represents Lee's ancestor.
But we soon found something
that erased all doubts:
Zadock Daniel's will, in
which he enumerates his
human property by name.
DANIELS: "to my
beloved wife, Martha,
and my three children by her,
Sarah B. Coakley,
Henderson l. Daniels,
and Thomas P. Daniels,
to be divided in
the following manner:
three, mmm...
Three negroes, Novel,
Harriet, and her child John,
two horses, her choice,
three cows and calves and
two younger cattle, her choice,
three sows and pigs and
as many young hogs to make
a sufficiency
of pork for her family."
Just that we are
able to be, you know,
that Black people were
talked about with the same,
in the same, with the same
with cows
and calves is disturbing.
GATES: It's horrible.
DANIELS: It's disturbing.
GATES: And they didn't even
think about it because they
were property just
like, and you read it,
the two horses,
three cows and calves.
DANIELS: Three sows and a pig.
GATES: Sows and pigs
and as many young hogs.
Oh, yeah, and three negroes.
Novel, boom.
So, you now know where the
name Daniel came from and
you know who owned,
the white man,
who owned your
ancestors in slavery.
Zadock Daniel.
DANIELS: It's, uh,
it's disturbing. Sad.
GATES: Novel's story
doesn't end here.
He survived slavery,
and started a family.
But like so many African
Americans of his generation,
he was unable to accrue any
wealth in the Jim Crow south.
He died a farmer, almost
certainly a sharecropper,
likely in the same part of
North Carolina where he had
spent decades in slavery.
Novel Daniels is also the
oldest ancestor we could
identify on this branch
of Lee's family tree.
Beyond him we
could go no further.
Surveying how far we'd come,
Lee found himself wondering
how so much of his
history had been obscured,
or willfully forgotten.
DANIELS: I don't
know why Black people,
why we kept
information to ourselves.
GATES: Pain?
DANIELS: I think, some of it.
GATES: Right.
DANIELS: Embarrassment maybe.
GATES: Embarrassment, I agree.
If you say it out
loud it makes it worse.
If I don't say it,
it'll go away and of course
it never goes away.
DANIELS: No.
GATES: We'd already reveled
how Rebecca Hall's grandfather,
Norman Ewing, concealed his
African American heritage
in an attempt to escape the
racism of Jim Crow America.
Now we turned our
attention to Norman's father,
Rebecca's great-grandfather,
a man named John Ewing.
John was born into
slavery in Tennessee in 1858,
meaning he was roughly seven
years old when freedom came.
It was a time when many Black
people were struggling
simply to survive.
And since his son Norman
chose to disguise
his African American ancestry,
I suspected that John's
life was severely limited
by those struggles too,
but I was mistaken.
John's obituary,
published in a Washington, DC
newspaper in 1911,
is a litany of
startling accomplishments.
HALL: "He came to the city in
the fall of 1872 as a result
of a desire to see
the national capitol.
Here he met President Grant,
Frederick Douglass,
John M. Langston,
and Horace Maynard,
who took a great interest
in him and secured for him
a position in the United
States Treasury Department,
which enabled him to enter
Howard University
Preparatory Department.
Here he continued until the
spring of 1875 when he went to
Constantinople with
Mr. Horace Maynard,
who had been appointed United
States minister to Turkey.
Mr. Ewing was always
interested in anything
looking to the elevation
of the race along
moral and educational lines."
Gosh. Excuse me. What?
GATES: Yes.
And all of that is true,
unlike the stories that
your grandfather confected.
HALL: Oh, my goodness.
GATES: Yes.
This is the heritage
your grandfather was
walking away from.
HALL: Oh, my, oh.
(stammering)
I don't really have any words.
GATES: We don't
how he did it, but,
for a time, Rebecca's ancestor
was one of the most prominent
African Americans in Washington
working for the
federal government,
interacting with
politicians and ambassadors,
and becoming a friend of
Frederick Douglass.
One the greatest minds this
country has ever produced and
the most famous Black man
of the entire 19th century.
HALL: I mean, these are
people I've read about...
GATES: Yes, of course.
HALL: I've ready about,
obviously I have but
it's truly mind-blowing.
GATES: Your great-grandfather
was a big deal.
HALL: He was. He was.
I'm glad that we can
celebrate him a little bit.
GATES: Yeah.
I want to show
you one more thing.
Could you please turn the page?
HALL: What?
GATES: That's your
great-grandfather.
That's John William Ewing.
HALL: He was dashing, huh?
GATES: He was dashing.
He was brilliant
and he was dashing.
HALL: Wow.
GATES: We now
faced a new question.
In the 1910 census,
John Ewing is listed
as being a mulatto,
meaning he likely had
recent white ancestry.
We were curious about
where it came from.
We knew that John's
mother, Violet Ewing,
was born around
1832 in Virginia.
But that's as far as the
paper trail could take us.
Then we noticed
something in Rebecca's DNA.
She has multiple matches with
people who can all
trace their ancestry
back to one couple.
Samuel and Mary Ewing.
They were both born in
Virginia in the 1780s,
and they were white.
What's more, they had relatives
who owned slaves,
including relatives
living in Tennessee,
where John was born.
So while we can't be certain,
we now had a compelling theory.
We think it's possible that
Violet was enslaved by the
Ewing family in
Virginia and she was moved,
quite possibly while
still pregnant to the
Lincoln County, Tennessee
area where members of the
extended Ewing family had been
residing since the early-1800s,
which is why your family
traces back to Tennessee.
So, think about
this, if we're right,
in 1860 your great-great-
grandmother Violet was
enslaved by the cousin of the
man who had impregnated her.
What's it like to learn this?
HALL: It's so sad.
GATES: Incredibly sad.
HALL: I find it very very sad
and I find it very moving that
you know that my mother,
that her sisters they
don't really have full access
to this and yet
they carry that name.
GATES: Mmm-hmm, yes.
HALL: And the history of that
and everything that in it.
It deserves to be known I think.
GATES: We were not yet
done with Rebecca's
African American roots,
not by a long shot.
John Ewing's wife,
Rebecca's great-grandmother,
was a woman named
Harriet Norman.
Harriet was born around
1864, likely in Ohio,
and she descends from a long
line of free Black people,
including, a man who
was born around 1760,
in what was then the
British colony of Maryland.
It's highly unusual for a
Black person to able to
identify an ancestor
from this era by name.
HALL: Bazabeel "Basil" Norman.
GATES: Bazabeel
"Basil" Norman.
You have just met your
fourth-great-grandfather.
Your great-great-great-
great-grandfather.
HALL: Yeah, i...
GATES: Can you believe
we've taken your mother's
family tree back this far?
HALL: No, I can't believe
that you have done this,
found all this information.
It's just truly,
truly remarkable.
And I understand how rare it is.
GATES: It is
exceptionally rare,
but I want to tell you
one little thing about
good old fourth-great-
grandfather Bazabeel.
HALL: Yeah. Please do.
GATES: Could you
please turn the page?
Rebecca, that
document was written in 1818.
So, it was recorded
more than 200 years ago.
Would you please read
the transcribed section?
HALL: "Bazabeel Norman of the
township of Roxbury,
County of Washington
and State of Ohio,
I enlisted in the
fall of the year 1777
into the company commanded
by Captain Richard Anderson
as a private soldier
and in the 7th regiment
commanded by Colonel John Gunby
in the Maryland line and
served my country against
the common enemy until the close
of the war on the continental
establishment when I was
discharged under
a general order."
GATES: Do you know
what that means?
HALL: I think I do but
I want you to tell me.
GATES: Rebecca, your
fourth-great-grandfather
fought in the
American Revolution.
HALL: Yeah.
That's what I thought.
GATES: He was a patriot.
Now, when you were a school girl
studying about the rebellion
of the colonies did you ever
think you had an ancestor,
a, who fought
with the patriots and
b, that he was Black?
HALL: No.
No, I did not.
GATES: Scholars estimate that
roughly 5,000 people of color
fought for our
nation's independence.
And Rebecca's 4th
great-grandfather was
one of them,
often on the front lines!
He served in the 7th Maryland
regiment of the continental
army, which fought up and
down the eastern seaboard,
in a number of notable battles,
including the famed
patriot victory at
Cowpens, South Carolina.
It was some of the
most intense combat of
the entire war,
and Bazabeel was compensated
for his courage by the
federal government
with a land grant in Ohio.
You are looking at
your family's land.
That is the very land that
Bazabeel settled in 1820
as a reward for
his heroic service during
the American Revolution.
HALL: Oh. Wow.
GATES: You have an
extraordinarily detailed
paper trail for a person
of African descent.
HALL: Yeah.
GATES: And you, my dear,
are indeed a person
of African descent.
HALL: I'm very
moved, obviously.
GATES: We had already explored
Lee Daniels' father's
family tree, untangling
the secrets of his
grandfather's parentage.
Now, turning to
Lee's mother's roots,
we traced back two generations
to his great-grandparents,
Edward and Mary Watson, and
encountered a very different
kind of secret.
Now, I understand that there's
a family story about them.
DANIELS: Yes.
GATES: Can you
tell me about this?
What you've heard.
DANIELS: I don't know
whether it's a rumor or
how accurate it is.
But that grand, my
great-grandfather.
GATES: Mm-hmm. Edward.
DANIELS: Edward.
Shot my great-grandmother
and killed her.
GATES: Okay.
DANIELS: How accurate is that?
GATES: We're going to find out.
DANIELS: Okay.
GATES: As it turns out, the
family story was quite accurate.
We found its tragic details
in an article published
in the "Philadelphia Inquirer"
on March 30th, 1922.
DANIELS: "Negro kills wife.
Shoots self.
Edward Watson,
colored, 45 years old,
shot his wife Mary,
32 years old,
last evening in the drug
store of Jerome Levinson,
19th and Fitzwater streets.
Mrs. Watson was hit below
the heart and died later.
After shooting his wife,
Watson fired into his
own mouth and it is
expected that he will die."
GATES: Mmm.
That's a lot to take in.
DANIELS: Mm-hmm.
It's coming back to me now.
I think that she
had had an affair.
GATES: Did you know that he
turned the gun on himself?
DANIELS: No.
I didn't know he
tried to kill himself.
I mean this is the
first time I'm actually
hearing this and seeing...
GATES: Gotcha.
DANIELS: It in writing that this
wasn't some sort of folklore.
GATES: Against all odds,
Edward survived his own
suicide attempt, then stood
trial for his wife's murder.
The court found him
to be of unsound mind,
and sentenced him to a
state-run hospital for the
criminally insane in
Fairview, Pennsylvania.
But Edward didn't
stay at Fairview.
When we found his
discharge papers,
they showed that
after six years,
Edward simply left the
institution, without permission.
DANIELS: What do
you mean he left?
GATES: He just walked away.
He just split after
spending six years there.
DANIELS: Wait, so he
kills my great-grandmother.
GATES: Right.
DANIELS: Goes into a
mental institution.
GATES: Spends six years.
DANIELS: And just walks out.
GATES: And he
walked away, man.
We don't know for sure.
We spoke to a Pennsylvania
legal scholar and he said
that it was likely he
just walked away and
simply never reported back.
What's it like to learn that?
DANIELS: Well, I was told,
again, folklore
was told to me that
he never went to jail
for it, for the murder.
GATES: Well,
that's kind of right.
I mean he went to a
mental institution,
six years and
then he walked out.
DANIELS: Walked out. Wow.
GATES: Edward's story was
about to take a final twist,
one that neither Lee nor
I could fully understand.
After leaving Fairview, Edward
returned to Philadelphia,
found a job at a newspaper,
and rebuilt his relationship
with his children,
despite the fact that he'd
murdered their mother.
GATES: Your mom
remembered him as a sweet,
well-dressed, debonair man.
But her father would always
tear up when she'd ask him
questions about his
mother's death which is
certainly understandable.
DANIELS: It's complicated.
GATES: It's complicated.
DANIELS: It's
really complicated.
You know, I had this weird
feeling as a kid if in fact
he did kill his wife
that's bad because,
and so I think having my
mother and father fighting
I think in the back of my head
I always felt that something
like that could
happen to my mother.
GATES: Oh, that's horrible
to live in fear of that.
DANIELS: Yeah.
And so, uh, and yet his
kids were so loving to him.
It was just a contradiction to,
and a forgiveness for
killing their mother.
GATES: I was going to say
they forgave him and they go,
well, you've got to move on.
Now's now and it's a terrible
thing that happened
and they moved on.
That was a monumental
act of forgiveness.
DANIELS: You just don't
understand how people change
their whole, I look at my kids
and I think about how they
view the world and how I view
the world and how my parents
view the world and how
their parents view the world,
viewed the world.
We all change.
What was normal for them
is not normal right now.
GATES: No, no.
Generational, dramatic
generational changes.
DANIELS: Mm-hum.
GATES: I had one
more surprise for Lee.
He told me that, growing up,
he'd felt a connection to his
mother's mother's
family, the Leecans.
They were musical, he recalled,
and fun-loving, and he
wanted to know more about them.
We traced this line back to
Lee's third great-grandparents,
Peter and Mary Ann Collins.
They were listed, by name,
in the 1850 census
for Philadelphia,
which tells us
something very significant
about their status.
The only people listed by name
in the 1850 census were free.
DANIELS: That's why they're
so damn uppity, them Leecans.
GATES: This is 15 years...
DANIELS: They weren't slaves.
I come from some uppity people.
GATES: They were free.
Did you have any idea?
DANIELS: No. And that's
so fabulous to hear.
It explains their joie de vivre.
GATES: When Peter and Mary Ann
lived in Philadelphia,
it was a center of free Black
life in the United States,
a place where African
Americans could raise families
in relative security.
The city had
thriving Black churches,
Black business, and an array
of Black social organizations.
But Lee's ancestors weren't
originally from Philadelphia.
They were both born in Delaware,
just miles to the south,
and a world away.
In Delaware, free people
of color were subject to a
restrictive series of laws
that limited their rights,
and threatened them
with terrible punishments.
It could result in
being sold into servitude.
DANIELS: So free but sort of?
GATES: Free but sort of.
On the edge and if you made
one mistake you could be
sold back into slavery.
DANIELS: You think that's the
reason why they skipped town
and went over to Pennsylvania?
GATES: My brother,
Philadelphia must have
seemed like heaven,
like quite an oasis.
They go, I'm outta here.
It was the nearest free city
to the southern slave states.
What's it like to learn this?
DANIELS: Not only is it a
history lesson but
it's personal.
It is, uh, powerful.
Our people have
gone through so much.
GATES: When the
Civil War ended,
Philadelphia had that
largest Black population of
any city in the north.
But it was by no means a
paradise for African Americans.
Black people were at the
bottom of a rapidly changing
social structure, competing for
work with recent immigrants
and facing a rising
tide of Jim Crow racism.
Lee's ancestors found
themselves living in
largely Black neighborhoods,
filled with poor tenement
housing and poor schools.
Lee's third great-grandfather
Peter worked as a
manual laborer, and
struggled to make a living
in this environment.
Struggles his
children would inherit,
leaving Lee filled with
gratitude at the thought of
all they endured.
DANIELS: How dare I complain.
How dare I complain or
feel bad or woe is me.
GATES: Right.
DANIELS: For whatever small
problem that I have right now.
They are looking down from the
heavens and they are so proud.
And it fills me with pride
that I know I made them happy.
GATES: That's great.
Can you imagine them
sitting around Philly going,
man, we're going to
have an ancestor.
He's going to be rich.
He's going to be famous.
Pass me the bourbon
isn't that great?
DANIELS: Yeah.
GATES: The paper trail had
run out for each of my guests.
It was time to unfurl
their full family trees.
HALL: It just keeps on going.
Wow.
DANIELS: My tribe.
GATES: And see what
DNA could tell us
about their deeper roots.
For Rebecca, this meant seeing
her hidden heritage quantified.
She's 9% sub-saharan African,
finally bringing closure
to the mystery that had hung
over her family for
more than a century.
What is the first thing you
are going to tell your mother?
HALL: I don't know.
I'm probably going
to say, you know,
ma, not only are we Black.
Like, we're really Black.
GATES: You're really Black.
You have deep...
HALL: Deep and the stories.
You're not going to believe it.
GATES: Yeah.
HALL: She probably won't.
GATES: Lee Daniels' DNA echoed
Rebecca's in showing just how
blended African Americans
and europeans actually are,
and how often we
seek to hide that fact.
Indeed Lee he thought he might
have a significant amount of
Native American ancestry,
but his admixture test told
a different story.
DANIELS: 1% of Native American,
I'm completely wrong.
GATES: Completely wrong.
DANIELS: I thought,
for some reason,
I don't know where
my family get's that...
Cause you look at my family,
they look like Indians.
The Leecans especially.
They look like they got a whole
lot of Indian up in them.
GATES: The reason they
look like it is because of
all that European
ancestry you have.
Look at that, you're a
third European. Almost.
DANIELS: 19% England.
Who'd have thunk that.
GATES: You are just
under a third of white.
This surprise would
soon yield another.
When we compared Lee's DNA
to that of everyone who's
been in our series, we
found a significant match,
evidence of a cousin
he didn't know he had,
one who almost certainly
shares his European heritage.
Would you please turn the page?
DANIELS: No. No!
GATES: Yes. Absolutely.
DANIELS: How is this possible?
GATES: Because of that 29%
white ancestry you have.
DANIELS: Mia Farrow?
GATES: Your DNA
cousin is Mia Farrow.
DANIELS: Ain't that something!
GATES: Lee and Mia share a
small identical segment of DNA
on their fourth chromosomes,
meaning they have a
distant common ancestor
somewhere in their family trees.
We don't know where.
We don't know their name.
But the DNA don't lie.
DANIELS: Isn't that something.
Hey, cousin.
GATES: Isn't that great?
DANIELS: Beautiful.
It's really beautiful, Skip.
GATES: That's the end
of our journey with
Lee Daniels and Rebecca Hall.
Please join me next
time when we unlock the
secrets of the past for new
guests on another episode of
"Finding Your Roots".